After the day’s work was done, Deford fell into the habit of going along with the newspaper’s typesetting and printing men to a workingman’s bar down by the docks. A regular at the bar was a woman, no longer so young, whom Deford called, in his breezy, vernacular way, “a lady of the evening.” She was, he said, an excellent storyteller. One day, the woman appeared in the bar looking crestfallen. It turned out that the mighty New York Yankees were in town to play Baltimore’s trudging Orioles. The woman had crossed paths with the Yankees’ star players, the slugging outfielder Mickey Mantle and the guileful pitcher Whitey Ford. One thing led to another and they’d spent the previous evening-into-morning together, drinking abundant spirits, with Mantle staying on for other indulgences. That afternoon, Ford would be pitching. As soon as the night was finally done, the woman hurried straight to her bookie and bet all of her earnings on the Orioles. Alas, the Yankees won, with Ford pitching a shutout and Mantle hitting a home run. The morals of the story, according to Deford, were two: whiskey and mediocre competition are no match for transcendent ability, and ladies of the evening never have any luck.And then there we were, zooming through the toll gate at a clip, Deford laughing with “See that!” glee, head thrown back with such pleasure that, ever since, I think of him every time I go through E-ZPass and don’t stop to pay my toll.He also believed that, when it came to athletes, people maintained a special interior relationship with a skilled player who was their own age. The inevitable arc of a physical glory giving way to decline in the thirties, when most of us still consider ourselves young, both presages and helps prepare us for the mortal day that awaits us all. That’s what Deford was thinking about thirty years ago, when he wrote about Gus Johnson, Deford’s own preferred sporting coeval. Johnson was a charismatic, powerful forward for the Baltimore Bullets, who played and lived hard, and died in 1987, at forty-eight. Writing in 